- Exam next Friday
	- covers everything up to Monday

## hypergeometric distribution (RV)

- Recall: example from last time.
	- 100 fuses total (all in a box) $N = N_{1} + N_{2}$
		- **N.B.**: think of it as collection of two different classes
		- Class 1: $N_{1} = 80$ elements
			- 80 good fuses
		- Class 2: $N_{2} = 20$
			- 20 defective fuses
	- we drew 5 of them ($n$)
	- $x$ is the rv that counts the number of defective fuses
	- $Q$: $P(X = x) = \dfrac{\dbinom{N_{2}}{x}\dbinom{N_{1}}{n-x}}{\dbinom{N_{1} + N_{2}}{n}};\quad x = 0, 1, 2, 3, \dots , n$
		- **N.B.**: this is the PMF of hypergeometric
	- We write $X \Rightarrow HG(N_{1} + N_{2}, N_{2}, n)$

1. **Example**:
	- A small pond has 50 fishes. 10 of those fishes are tagged.
	- A fisherman fished 7 of them.
	- Let $x$ be the rv that counts the number of tagged fish(es) among the 7.
	- $Q$: Find the PMF of $x$.
	- Answer: $P(X = x) = \dfrac{\dbinom{10}{x}\dbinom{40}{7-x}}{\dbinom{50}{7}};\quad x=0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7$

## Discrete Uniform Distribution

- **Example**: Roll a die and let $X$ be the rv that accounts for the number of the upface.
	- **Q**: What is the  PMF of $X$?
		- possible values of $X$ are $X \in \{ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 \} = D_{X}$
		- probability assigned to each of these values
			- $P(X = i) = \dfrac{1}{6};\quad i=1,2,3,4,5,6$
			- **N.B.**: called the discrete uniform distribution bc each element is a discrete variable to begin with and each element has equal probability of happening.
- Suppose $X$ is a random variable that takes value $D_{X} = \{ 1, 2, 3,\dots, n \}$
	- where $P(X = i) = \frac{1}{n};\quad i = 1,2, 3, \dots, n$
	- $X$ is said to follow a discrete uniform distribution.
		- **N.B.**: suppose you want to write a CDF of this dist.
			- CDF is defined for all real numbers
		- CDF: $F(x) = P(X \leq x),\, \in \mathbb{R}$
		- $F(x) = \begin{cases} 0 &x < 1 \\ \dfrac{1}{n} &1 \leq x < 2 \\ \dfrac{2}{n} & 2\leq x < 3 \\ \dfrac{3}{n} & 3\leq x < 4 \\ &\vdots \\ \dfrac{n}{n} & n\leq x \end{cases}$
			- **N.B.**: see graph from [[17.9.25 Probability & Statistics Class Notes|previous class]] pics

## Mathematical Expectation of Discrete RVS.

- Recall:
	- Flip a coin 3 times.
	- $X$ is the rv that counts the number of Heads.
	1. If we repeat the experiment 1000 times, how many heads do we expect on average.
		- Recall PMF of $X$:  $$ \begin{array}{|c|c|c|c|} \hline x & 0 & 1 & 2 & 3 & \text{Total} \\ \hline P(x) & \frac{1}{8} & \frac{3}{8} & \frac{3}{8} & \frac{1}{8} & 1 \\ \hline \end{array} $$
		- We expect to get:
			- $\mathbb{E}(x) = 0\cdot \frac{1}{8} + 1 \cdot \frac{3}{8} + 2 \cdot \frac{3}{8} + 3 \cdot \frac{1}{8}$
				- $= \dfrac{3 + 6 + 3}{8}$
				- $= \dfrac{12}{8} = 1.5$
				- **N.B.**: expectation is multiplying the weights or possible values of $x$ (0, 1, 2, 3) with the probability of x

- Formula: For a discrete rv $x$ with range $D_{X}$
	- The expectation (or expected value) of $X$ is given by $$ \boxed{ \mathbb{E}(x) = \sum_{x \in D_{X}} x P(x) } $$

- More general formula for expectation.
	- Example with 3 coin flips.
	- Let $y = 2x^2 - 3$ be the amount of money gained or lost.
		- **N.B.**: need to compute the expectation, taking into account probability of each toss
	- **Q**: What is the expectation of $y: \mathbb{E}(y)$?
		- $D_{X} = x \in \{  0, 1, 2, 3 \}$
		- $D_{y} = y \in \{ -3, -1, 5, 15 \}$
		- PMF of $y$: $$ \begin{array}{|c|c|c|c|} \hline y & -3 & -1 & 5 & 15 & \text{Total} \\ \hline P(x) & \frac{1}{8} & \frac{3}{8} & \frac{3}{8} & \frac{1}{8} & 1 \\ \hline \end{array} $$
			- $\mathbb{E}(y) = -3 \left( \frac{1}{8}  \right) -1 \left( \frac{3}{8} \right) + 5 \left( \frac{3}{8} \right) + 15\left( \frac{1}{8} \right)$
				- $= \dfrac{-3 -3 + 15 + 15}{8} = \dfrac{24}{8} = $\$3
				- expect to win $3 so we should play
		- Expected value: $\sum_{x \in D_{X}} \left( 2x^2 - 3 \right)P(x)$

- Formula: let $X$ be a discrete rv. set $y = \mu(x)$
	- **N.B.**: $\mu(x)$ is a function of the rv $x$ 
	- **N.B.**: General formula for the expectation of a function of a random variable
- Then the expectation (expected value) of $y$ is given by $$ \mathbb{E}(y) = \sum_{x \in D_{X}} \mu(x)\cdot P(x)\quad \text{where }P(x)\text{ is PMF of }x. $$

### Properties of Expectation.

- Let $x$, $y$ be discrete random variables.
- Suppose $a, b, c$ are constants.
- Let $\mu(x)$ and $\nu(y)$ be functions of $x$ and $y$ respectively. Then: $$ \mathbb{E}\left( a \mu (x) + b \nu(y) + c \right) = a \mathbb{E}(\mu (x)) + b \mathbb{E}(\nu (x)) + c.  $$
	- **N.B.**: expectation should go to where there's randomness
- Example from previous:
	- $\mathbb{E}(y) = \mathbb{E}(2x^2 - 3) = 2\mathbb{E}(x^2) - 3$
		- $=2 \left[ 0^2 \cdot \frac{1}{8} + 1^2 \cdot \frac{3}{8} + 2^2 \cdot \frac{3}{8} + 3^2 \cdot \frac{1}{8} \right] - 3 =$ \$3.
