## Binomial Distribution

- **Recall**:
	- random variable $x \leadsto \operatorname{Binom}(n, P)$
		- $n$ represents the number of trials
		- $P$ is the probability of success
		- $X$ counts the number of successes out of $n$ trials
	1. pmf of $x$:
		- $\mathbb{P}(X = k) = \dbinom{n}{k} P^k (1-P)^{n-k}, \, k = 0, 1, 2,\dots, n$.
	2. Expectation and Variance of $X$:
		- $\mathbb{E}(X) = nP, \, \operatorname{Var}( X ) = nP(1-P)$
			- or $= nPq$ where $q = 1-P$
	3. mgf of $X$ is
		- $M_{x}(t) = \left( 1-p + pe^t \right)^n$
		- **N.B.**: take derivative and plug in 0 to find variance
	4. CDF of $X$ is
		- $F(x) = \mathbb{P}(X \leq x) = \sum_{k=0}^{\lfloor x \rfloor} \dbinom{n}{k} P^k (1-P)^{n-k}; \, x \in \mathbb{R}$

- **Binomial Formula**
	- set $q = 1-P$
		- $\left( p + q \right)^n = \sum_{k=0}^n \dbinom{n}{k}P^k q^{n-k}$
			- $(P+1-P)^n = \sum \dbinom{n}{k} P^k (1-P)^{n-k}$
			- $1 = 1^n = \sum \dbinom{n}{k} P^k (1-P)^{n-k}$
				- **N.B.**: adds to 1 using binomial

- **Example**: A cosmetic company produces goblets.
	- 8% of the goblets have flaws.
	- Suppose 6 goblets are selected at random.
		- **N.B.**: selections are independent from each other
		
	1. What is the probability exactly one of them have flaws?
	2. What is the probability exactly two of them have flaws?
	3. What is the probability at least one of them have flaws?
	4. How many are expected to have flaws?
		
	- **N.B.**: Ask question to begin problem
		- does it look like a distribution I know
		- binomial problem: $n = 6$
			- number of trials
		- $P = 0.08$
			- prob of succ.
			- **N.B.**: success is subjective, here it's if it has a flaw
				- take given probability as the success
	- Need to write the pmf
		- $P(X = k) = \dbinom{6}{k} 0.08^k (1-0.08)^{6-k} \, k=0,1,\dots, 6$
	1. $P(\text{exactly one})$ is $\mathbb{P}(x=1) = \dbinom{6}{1} 0.08^1 (1-0.08)^{6-1}$
		- $= 6 (0.08) 0.92^5$
	2. $\mathbb{P}(\text{exactly 2 flaws}) = \mathbb{P}(x=2) = \dbinom{6}{2} 0.08^2 (1-0.08)^{6-2}$
	3. $\mathbb{P}(\text{At least one flaws}) = \mathbb{P}(1) + \mathbb{P}(2) + \dots + \mathbb{P}(6)$
		- $= \mathbb{P}(X \geq 1) = \sum_{k=1}^6 \dbinom{6}{k} 0.08^k \cdot 0.92^{6-k}$
		- Alternatively, could have used complementation
			- $\mathbb{P}(X \geq 1) = 1 - \mathbb{P}(x < 1)$
				- $= 1-\mathbb{P}(x=0)$
				- $= 1 - \dbinom{6}{0} \cdot 0.08 ^0 \cdot 0.92^{6-0}$
				- $= 1 - 0.92^6$
		- If you wanted to write it as a CDF
			- $= 1 - P(X \leq 0)$
			- $= 1 - \sum_{k=0}^{\lfloor 0 \rfloor} \dbinom{6}{k} 0.08^k 0.92^{6-k}$
			- **N.B.**: cdf computed at zero
	4. compute expectation
		- $\mathbb{E}(X) = nP$
			- $= 6 (0.08) = 0.48$

- **Example**
	- An agricultural cooperative claims 80% of the watermelon they ship out are ripe and ready for consumption.
	- Suppose 15 watermelons are selected at random from the one shipped out.
	1. What is the probability at least 1 of them are ripe?
	2. What is the probability at least 8 of them are ripe?
	3. What is the probability at most 5 of them are ripe?
	4. What is the CDF of $X$, the number of ripe watermelons?
	5. How many watermelons are expected to be ripe?
	6. What is the variance and SD (standard deviation) of $x$?
		
	- **N.B.**: first determine if it's a binomial problem
		- what's the number of trials? $n = 15$
		- prob is the prob of being ripe $P = 0.8$
		- **N.B.**: need these two for $x \leadsto \operatorname{Binom}(n,P)$
	1. $\mathbb{P}(X \geq 1) = \sum_{k=1}^{15} \dbinom{15}{k} 0.8^k 0.2^{15-k}$
		- Alternatively, $\mathbb{P}(X \geq 1) = 1 - \mathbb{P}(x=0) = 1 - 0.2^{15}$
	2. $\mathbb{P}(x \geq 8) = \sum_{k=8}^{15} \dbinom{15}{k} 0.8^k 0.2^{15-k}$
	3. $\mathbb{P}(X \leq 5) = F(5)$
		- $= \sum_{k=0}^{5} \dbinom{15}{k} 0.8^k \cdot 0.2^{15-k}$
	4. $F(x) = \mathbb{P}(X \leq x) = \sum_{k=0}^{\lfloor x \rfloor}\dbinom{15}{k} 0.8^k (0.2)^{15-k}, x \in \mathbb{R}$
	5. $\mathbb{E}(x) = 15 (0.8)$
	6. $\operatorname{Var}( x ) = np(1-p) = 15 (0.8)(0.2)$
		- $\operatorname{SD}(x) = \sigma_{x} = \sqrt{ \operatorname{Var}( x ) } = \sqrt{ 15 (0.8)(0.2) }$

### Negative Binomial Distribution

- Geometric Distribution
	- most basic neg binom distribution
	- $e$.$g$. flip a coin $n$ times, probability it comes up head is P
		- keep flipping until you get the first head
		- $X$ is the rv is the number of times you flip the coin until you get the first success
	
- Example coin with probability of success $P$.
	- $i$.$e$. $P(X = H) = P$.
	- Flip the coin until the first success (independent flips)
	- The random variable $x$ that counts the number of flips until the first success is a geometric random variable with parameter $P$.
	- We write $X \leadsto \operatorname{Geom}(P)$.
	
- **Explanation**
	- 1st flip:
		- S
		- $x = 1$
		- $P(X = 1) = P$
	- 2nd flip:
		- FS
		- $x=2$
		- $\mathbb{P}(X=2) = (1-P)P$
	- 3rd flip:
		- $FFS$
		- $x= 3$
		- $P(x=3)=(1-P)^2P$
	- $\vdots$
	- $n-1$ flips:
		- $FF\dots FS$
		- $x = n$
		- $P(X=n) = (1-P)^{n-1}P$
	- pmf of $x \leadsto \operatorname{Geom}(P)$
		- $\mathbb{P}(X=k) = (1-P)^{k-1} P, \, k=1,2,3,4,\dots$
		- $\mathbb{E}(x) = \dfrac{1}{P}$
			- **N.B.**: should expect to flip less times w/ greater opportunity
			- inverse relationship
